From ccshan at cs.rutgers.edu  Tue Feb  8 21:31:03 2011
From: ccshan at cs.rutgers.edu (Chung-chieh Shan)
Date: Tue, 8 Feb 2011 15:31:03 -0500
Subject: [Haskell-cafe] ACM SIGPLAN Workshop on ML
Message-ID: <7pl828-dk8.ln1@mantle.bostoncoop.net>

ACM SIGPLAN Workshop on ML
Sunday, 18 September 2011, Tokyo, Japan (co-located with ICFP)
http://conway.rutgers.edu/ml2011/

CALL FOR CONTENT

The ML family of programming languages includes dialects known as
Standard ML, Objective Caml, and F#.  These languages have inspired
a large amount of computer-science research, both practical and
theoretical.  This workshop aims to provide a forum for discussion and
research on ML and related technology (higher-order, typed, or strict
languages).

The format of ML 2011 will continue the return in 2010 to a more
informal model: a workshop with presentations selected from submitted
abstracts.  Presenters will be invited to submit working notes, source
code, and extended papers for distribution to the attendees, but the
workshop will not publish proceedings, so any contributions may be
submitted for publication elsewhere.  We hope that this format will
encourage the presentation of exciting (if unpolished) research and
deliver a lively workshop atmosphere.

SCOPE

We seek research presentations on topics related to ML, including but
not limited to

  * applications: case studies, experience reports, pearls, etc.
  * extensions: higher forms of polymorphism, generic programming,
    objects, concurrency, distribution and mobility, semi-structured
    data handling, etc.
  * type systems: inference, effects, overloading, modules, contracts,
    specifications and assertions, dynamic typing, error reporting, etc.
  * implementation: compilers, interpreters, type checkers, partial
    evaluators, runtime systems, garbage collectors, etc.
  * environments: libraries, tools, editors, debuggers, cross-language
    interoperability, functional data structures, etc.
  * semantics: operational, denotational, program equivalence,
    parametricity, mechanization, etc.

Research presentations should describe new ideas, experimental results,
significant advances in ML-related projects, or informed positions
regarding proposals for next-generation ML-style languages.  We
especially encourage presentations that describe work in progress, that
outline a future research agenda, or that encourage lively discussion.

In addition to research presentations, we seek both Status Reports
and Demos that emphasize the practical application of ML research and
technology.

Status Reports:  Status reports are intended as a way of informing
others in the ML community about the status of ML-related research or
implementation projects, as well as communicating insights gained from
such projects.  Status reports need not present original research, but
should deliver new information.  In the abstract submission, describe
the project and the specific technical content to be presented.

Demos:  Live demonstrations or tutorials should show new developments,
interesting prototypes, or work in progress, in the form of tools,
libraries, or applications built on or related to ML.  In the abstract
submission, describe the demo and its technical content, and be sure
to include the demo's title, authors, collaborators, references, and
acknowledgments.  (Please note that you will need to provide all the
hardware and software required for your demo; the workshop organizers
are only able to provide a projector.)

Each presentation should take 20-25 minutes, except demos, which should
take 10-15 minutes.  The exact time will be decided based on the number
of accepted submissions.  We plan to make videos of the presentations
available on ACM Digital Library.

SUBMISSION INSTRUCTIONS

Email submissions to ccshan AT cs.rutgers.edu.  Submissions should be
at most two pages, in PDF format, and printable on US Letter or A4
sized paper.  Persons for whom this poses a hardship should contact the
program chair.  Submissions longer than a half a page should include a
one-paragraph synopsis suitable for inclusion in the workshop program.

IMPORTANT DATES

  * 2011-06-17: Submission
  * 2011-07-22: Notification
  * 2011-09-18: Workshop

PROGRAM COMMITTEE

    Amal Ahmed (Indiana University)
    Andrew Tolmach (Portland State University)
    Anil Madhavapeddy (University of Cambridge)
    Chung-chieh Shan (chair) (Rutgers University)
    Joshua Dunfield (Max Planck Institute for Software Systems)
    Julia Lawall (University of Copenhagen)
    Keisuke Nakano (University of Electro-Communications)
    Martin Elsman (SimCorp)
    Walid Taha (Halmstad University)

STEERING COMMITTEE

    Eijiro Sumii (chair) (Tohoku University)
    Andreas Rossberg (Google)
    Jacques Garrigue (Nagoya University)
    Matthew Fluet (Rochester Institute of Technology)
    Robert Harper (Carnegie Mellon University)
    Yaron Minsky (Jane Street)



