From conor at strictlypositive.org  Tue Aug  9 17:13:32 2011
From: conor at strictlypositive.org (Conor McBride)
Date: Tue, 9 Aug 2011 16:13:32 +0100
Subject: [Haskell-cafe] PhD Position available at Strathclyde
Message-ID: <978DB9B1-786E-404F-B6A3-0932D35689CA@strictlypositive.org>

[My colleague, Patricia Johann, advertises the following...]

                      PhD Position
                          in
      Category Theory and Functional Programming

      Department of Computer and Information Sciences
           University of Strathclyde, Scotland

Applications are invited for one PhD position within the  
Mathematically Structured Programming group at the University of  
Strathclyde. The group comprises Prof. Neil Ghani, Dr. Patricia  
Johann, Dr. Conor McBride, Dr. Peter Hancock, Dr. Robert Atkey, and  
six PhD students. The PhD project centres around applications of  
categorical methods to functional programming languages. The project  
is under the direction of Patricia Johann.

The successful applicant will have either a first-class degree or an  
MSc in Mathematics or Computing Science or a related subject with a  
strong Mathematics or Computing Science component. Ideally, they will  
also have a strong, documented interest in doing research. Strong  
mathematical background and problem-solving skills are essential; good  
programming skills are a plus. Prior knowledge of category theory and/ 
or functional programming is an advantage, but is not required.

The PhD position is for 3 years; it starts in January 2012. The  
position is a fully-funded post for a UK or EU student, and includes  
both coverage of fees and an EPSRC-level stipend for each of the three  
years. More information about the department is available at

       http://www.strath.ac.uk/cis

The University of Strathclyde (http://www.strath.ac.uk) is located in  
the heart of Glasgow, which Lonely Planet Travel Guides hail as "one  
of Britain's largest, liveliest and most interesting cities" (seehttp://www.lonelyplanet.com/worldguide/scotland/glasgow/) 
. Southern Scotland provides a particularly stimulating environment  
for researchers in theoretical computer science, with active groups in  
this area at Heriot-Watt University, the University of Edinburgh, the  
University of Glasgow, the University of St. Andrews, and the  
University of Strathclyde.

Requests for further information and other informal enquiries can be  
sent to:
       Patricia Johann
       patricia at cis.strath.ac.uk

Those interested in the position are asked to send e-mail to the  
address given above in the next short while.



